Hello everyone,
I welcome you all to this wonderful
course on computer networks.
I am your instructor here
to take you throughout this
journey on computer networks.
Before we start,
let's figure out
to whom this course
is actually intended to.
This course is mainly for
the undergraduate students.
And this course is
useful for the students
who are preparing for
their GATE exams.
And not only GATE exams,
this course will surely help
the students to crack
networking based interviews.
This course can be
a prerequisite course
to CCNA international
certification course.
And if you want to demystify all
the networking technologies
and jargons used in
the networking field,
this course will surely
fulfill your expectation.
In a nutshell, this course
will surely quench
the thirst of
computer networking.
And coming to the
scope of this course,
trust me guys, networking
is everywhere.
Because network supports
the way we learn,
network supports the
way we communicate,
network supports the way we work
and the way we play.
I shall explain you how
network supports the way we learn.
I am the instructor
of this course
and I am teaching in
one part of the world.
And the learners are in
different parts of the world.
Still teaching and learning is
happening very seamlessly.
That's the power of networking.
Network supports the way we communicate.
Think of a traditional
land-line phone communication.
We used to send only
our voice data, but now
the communication pattern
has entirely changed.
Think of an example
mobile application Whatsapp.
We are able to send text, images,
animations, videos, audios,
and even voice calls and video calls
which are real time communication.
We are able to do all this
communication seamlessly
and perfectly with the
help of computer networks.
Isn't the computer network awesome guys?
Network supports the way we work.
Yes, one can work from home by
accessing the files and softwares
actually available
in the company.
And network supports the way we play too.
Talking about the pedagogy,
we need to understand
the theoretical background
of all the concepts.
Hence we go with the
traditional lecturing methods
and the contemporary
lecturing methods.
As I already mentioned to you
that we will be solving
many GATE examination related
problems here in this course.
And to understand
the things practically,
world's one of the most powerful
simulation and learning tools,
the CISCO packet
tracer is used.
And talking about the syllabi, in the first
phase of the computer networking course
the fundamentals are
dealt elaborately.
Actually computer
networks follows layering
to send data from
one computer to another
and each layer is addressed
separately as a separate chapters
and it is dealt in a
very detailed manner.
And security is very
important not only in real life
even for computer
networks too.
And in the last phase of
the computer networks
will cover the
need for security
and how security is provided
in computer networks.
Now let's talk about the
outcomes of today's lecture.
Upon the completion of this lecture,
the learner will be
able to understand
What is computer network?
and they will be able to
identify end devices
and intermediary devices
if the scenario is given.
We will start with the definition
of a computer network.
A computer network is a set of nodes
connected by communication links.
I repeat -- A computer
network is a set of nodes
connected by
communication links.
To understand this definition,
I shall highlight the important words.
They are the keywords
of this definition.
The keywords are - nodes
and communication links.
Firstly, we will concentrate on nodes.
A node can be a computer,
printer or any other device
capable of sending or receiving data.
Say you have a device, if that device
can send data or receive data
or both send and
receive data,
then we can call that
device as a node.
So a node can be a computer,
printer or any device
but the important point
to note here is that
device should be capable enough
in sending or receiving the data.
We shall see some
examples for nodes.
Obviously, a computer
is a node because
a computer can send data
as well as receive data.
A server, printer,
security camera
and many devices like
switches, bridges
and routers are also
called as nodes.
We will be dealing
about switches,
bridges and routers in
the upcoming lectures.
Now we are done with nodes.
We will concentrate on
what are communication links.
A communication link can be
a wired link or a wireless link.
The important point to
note about a link is that
this link only carries the information.
If you don't understand
anything out of this,
just wait for
this example.
See this example now,
there are two
computers.
We can call these two computers as nodes.
Why? Because these
two computers
can send data as
well as receive data.
Now these nodes are going to
exchange their information,
but for exchanging
the information,
they are depending upon this cable.
Here this cable
is the link.
Obviously, a cable is
a physical medium,
so it comes under
wired category.
So wired link carries
the information
from this computer to this
computer or vice-versa.
But there are scenarios where,
two devices wants to
communicate with each other
but not with the
help of cables.
Say in this scenario, these two
smart-phones wants to exchange data.
Say, this phone wants to
give some data to this phone.
In this case there is
no physical connectivity.
Then how can that
communication be established?
This is possible through
wireless technologies,
if that is the case, who is
going to carry the signals?
Obviously, air is going
to carry the data.
So here, air is
the link that
carries the data from
one place to another place.
So we have two kinds
of communication links
one is a wired link and
another one is a wireless link.
And the link only
carries the information.
We shall see some examples.
Cable is a best example for wired link
and air is the best example for wireless link.
Now let's take this
example, where this example
involves lots of nodes
and so many links.
If you observe, certain
links are wired links
and certain links
are wireless links.
So this is a perfect example of
a sample computer network.
Now what are all the devices
or nodes involved in the network?
This printer is a node,
desktop computers are nodes,
tablet is a node,
this smart-phone is a node,
cellphone tower is a node,
this wireless router is a node,
router, internet cloud, et cetera.
See there are lots of nodes
involved in this internet cloud.
In reality, internet contains lots of intermediary devices,
these all are intermediary devices
and these all are end devices.
Why we call this as end device?
Because this will be either the
starting point of the communication
or the end point in
the communication.
Say for example, if this computer wants
to access www.nesoacademy.org,
so here, the link between this computer
and this device- this switch is the wired link.
But communication can happen
through this intermediary devices.
Similarly, if this
smart-phone also wants
to get some data
from nesoacademy.org,
this can also give the
request but this request
can be carried out either
this way or this way.
But if you observe both in the ways, they are wireless.
So the same server can be
accessed with the help of wires
as well as with the
help of wireless.
Now, the important point to note
about a computer network
is that, it is mainly used
for resource sharing.
A computer network is mainly
used for resource sharing.
Say, there are four
computers here,
if all four computers
wants a printer,
it is definitely not an
ideal solution to purchase
four printers for
all computers.
Think of the scenario this way,
I have brought
in a printer
and connected this
printer to my network.
Now all these four computers
can use this printer.
So thus, networks save a
lot of infrastructure cost as well.
And there is an interesting
scenario for you.
You have to find out
what are all the end devices
used in the scenario
and what are the
intermediary devices.
After finding out all the end
devices and the intermediary devices,
just list out like this
on your paper.
So I am showing this
scenario for you.
Please take a piece of
paper and note down
all the end devices and
intermediary devices.
Please pause this video for
a while and carry out this task.
Once done, you compare
this with the actual result.
Now if your result is
matching with this result,
congratulations to you.
You are progressing
in a right direction.
If not, no problem guys.
We are in the initial stage,
it will take some lectures
to understand the
details about networking.
Upon the completion
of this lecture,
the learner will be
able to understand
what is computer network?
And given a scenario, the learner
will be able to identify
what are end devices and
what are intermediary devices.
I hope you are all very clear with
the definition of a computer network.
It is a set of nodes connected
by communication links,
where that link can be
a wired link or a wireless link.
The devices which are the
source or the destination
in the communication are
called as end devices.
The devices which
forwards the data
from one side to another side
are called as intermediary devices.
Thank you for watching.